all right I think it is three so we'll
go and get started um thanks for coming
I'm really excited to do this uh I'm
going to be talking for the next couple
of minutes on building a simple command
line interface this was something that
seemed really um hard and mysterious for
me for a little while and uh um realized
that there are at least a a really
simple way to do this if that's if
that's we just want to do some simple
stuff um before I jump in though I'm
really curious to know uh from I want to
hear from you what would be worth 20
minutes of your time um in other words
what what can I focus on what questions
you have up front that I can try to
answer so that hopefully this is a a
really valuable presentation for
you
framewor okay so what what is the
framework for command line interface
that we can kind of add on to okay what
else okay yeah how do move beyond the if
statements into doing something else
okay in the back
okay okay all right so um so getting
data off the device how might we use the
UR system for that and putting somewhere
on our host system
okay great anything
else okay um excellent in that case uh I
might end up kind of going through the
bulk of the talk rather quickly um the
part that was mysterious for me for a
little while was honestly was the if
statements like what is is happening
when I type something into a console and
my microcontroller does something um
maybe a lot of the questions that uh
were had or presented just now might get
answered when I get to that going
further part I feel like I got a a lot
of links there it's a lot of stuff for
everyone to kind of check out to go
beyond a real basic uh command line
interface to something more powerful
okay um
so command line interfaces um like it
sounds like many of us are are are
familiar with uh as they relate to an
embedded system a microcontroller can do
a lot of things for us um we can control
tasks and query the state of the
microcontroller from a uh shell on the
device um which is something we'll see
today um I can if I'm bringing up a
microcontroller I can write a small
almost like small repple um in order to
interact with the microcontroller and
make sure that I've configured
peripherals correctly and uh maybe I've
got an i2c sensor that I'm trying to
talk to um with a couple of command line
in instructions I can I can uh instead
of programming something and flashing
and hoping it works I can kind of talk
to it directly over the console to to
make sure it's configured correctly um I
can load data or get data off my device
uh or upload firmware on cortex M
devices there's actually a really
interesting interrupt that allows me to
to do onchip debugging over the uart
peripheral which is really cool and um
what if I really start to carry this I
to its logical conclusion um I can start
to develop almost like a small operating
system for my microcontroller or or or a
small kind of monitor that lets me run
different programs and interact with the
device and and inspect memory um I got
two examples here you'll see more later
um that are things we can put on our
embedded systems that interact over the
UR port and and that start to look like
like tiny
computers um I thought Andy Turk uh had
a great quot this is a random quote that
I got from a a Blog for he just said hey
you know if I'm starting with a
microcontroller as soon as I can blink
an LED I'm going to try to talk to that
Ur Port try to get a little command line
shell going um which I thought was was
really great advice to um about getting
a system kind of up and
running um okay so I'm GNA give you a
couple of demos really quick uh this is
one example of a a very simple command
line interface running on my little um
st32 stm32 microcontroller let me pull
up the right one okay okay and uh so
like you can see from my little message
dictionary here kind of uh i' I've
programmed this to respond to four basic
commands um and uh I'll see if I can try
to hold this up so you can see my little
uh blinking LED up here in the corner
that I can control with my um off
commands sweet okay I can turn it back
on
again I can change um the duty cycle to
10%
or
90% I can change the frequency to
something really
fast or
something on the slower
side
[Music]
um yeah okay so um so we'll see today
how this you might build this just um
for uh for this system here uh
additionally I've got a uh a little
Arduino board here reading from my
potentiometer
and I'm going to show you a little a
little python script I've written in pqt
which is uh displaying live the ADC
values coming uh from my my Arduino
microcontroller so so we can do more
than just kind of interact with these
devices from the console we can actually
almost consider this as like a like a
communication system between the
microcontroller and our and our host
computer and I'll let your imagination
run wild with all the um things that we
could do uh in pqt and some sort of
graphical user interface with pulling
data off the device having buttons that
send data commands to the the
microcontroller in order to do um all
kinds of stuff now this might not seem
like a um a command line interface but I
think it still counts
because
[Music]
um all this thing is doing every time it
uh the pqt console sends an R character
to the Arduino it responds with its ADC
value so I can still kind of like get
into the the shell here and interact
with this thing um so there's lots of
really neat things that we can do with
um our command line interfaces and
you'll see it um how to build those
today the um low level kind of and uh
very basic way that we Implement these
command line interfaces in is in three
steps so we'll talk about each one we're
going to make sure that we can read
something coming over the uart port on
our microcontroller we're going to take
that string that we've received and
parse it into somehow into into p pieces
and then interpret those in a way that
lets us execute something um okay so
Step One Reading from the UR peripheral
um I've got a flowchart here for for a
very basic program uh the top half is my
um my little task that's going to read
from the UR port and build up a string
right now it's not going to do anything
with that string it's just going to
build it up and then underneath that I
have um a little blinky task and it's
important that these be non-blocking at
least as long as I'm not using a a
realtime operating system um so that I I
can do I can do both
simultaneously um and so on
uh in our
doino all right so here's my here's my
Loop I'm just checking if uh if there is
serial data available if there is I'm
going to Echo it back to the computer
because that doesn't happen by default
um as long as the character that was
received is not the new line or the
carriage return which I'm going to use
to sort of signify the end of some
command I'm going to add that to my
command string and uh as soon as I do
receive one of those two characters at
this point I'm just going to I'm just
going to erase what's in memory at some
point I'll do something with that uh and
then down here I have a non-blocking way
to kind of blink an LED on and
off all right so we start off with just
these two kind of non-blocking tasks um
reading a char
and then triggering some action when the
new line or the the carriage return
characters are uh received on the stm32
at least if I'm using the how I don't
have like a serial. available function
which would be really convenient so I
have to do this uh a slightly different
way the best way that i' I found out how
to do this is to um make a an an array
in memory where I'm going to store this
the string that I'm receiving over art
and then to set up the UR peripheral to
receive a single character via the
interrupt so I've got my um how art
received undor it function which is
going to set up this the the art
interrupt to receive one character as
soon as it receives that one character
then inside my interrupt I'm going to
add that that value to my my array of of
um of characters um and and then inside
that interrupt it'll set itself up to
re-trigger on the next so so one
character at a time this interrupt is
triggering and adding a character into
an array and only when uh it receives
that new lineer that carriage return
character at the very end does it set a
flag which I'm calling command received
sets this flag to be true and then in my
main code once that flag is true then I
I do something with it all
right so I'm using the
um uh I use Cub MX
to um to write this okay so you can see
um I'll jump to the the main code here
right this is where I I initialize my
interrup T receive one character um and
uh when that gets triggered up here you
can see this is where I'm echoing that
character back to the console so I'm
using the hore _ transmit function to do
that and as long as I have not received
yet the new liner carriage return and as
long as I still have room in my buffer
then I set the inter up to trigger again
once I do get one of those two
characters then I um I kind of reset
some stuff and set my command received
flag to True down here in my my my Loop
code um once that flag is true then I
can do something with my string here I'm
I'm basically just clearing stuff some
some stuff out of memory but otherwise
we would do something interesting here
with that string once we' received it
and then underneath that is my my Blinky
task
all right let me get my slides back one
sec come
on okay um so we can receive your string
over art and at the same time we're
doing something else on our code let's
extend that number two is we're going to
actually start to interpret these
strings we're going to respond to simple
commands we'll start with just onoff for
the LED and uh so we're going to make
one small change to our flowchart which
is instead of um just clearing out our
buffer when we finish receiving our
string with our our new liner charact or
carriage return character now we're
actually going to do a little bit of a
string comparison right if the string
matches on we'll do something if it
matches off we'll do something else and
so
um in
here we
go all right so in my Arduino code um
starts off the same and I'm checking if
a Sero character is available uh I'm
echoing that character if it is if it's
not the new line or the carriage return
I'm just adding that to my string and
then um here previously I was sort of
clearing out the the the the string but
now I'm actually doing a comparison to
check if it's on or off and in the code
now what I'm doing is setting uh kind of
another flag variable I'm setting an LED
is blinking value to either true or
false and I'm using that down here as
I'm blinking my led to control whether
that task actually executes or not
um yeah well so so this is in in uh in
C++ defining this as a string lets me do
that you're you're right in in um in C I
have to get a little um I use something
a little different so on the stm32 code
um you'll see a string
comparison
um in my main code right here if string
compare is on is equal to zero then I do
something
yeah um okay so now that we can respond
to single word commands we can add some
values onto those and you'll see here
I'm extending my flowchart a little bit
um and before I I process some commands
I'm I'm going to basically look for this
value so the way I chose to kind of go
about doing this was um um looking for
the space character I'm using the space
character to separate my
the parts of my command string um and so
um so I decided okay if uh if the spring
if there's a a space present then I'm
going to carve up this this string into
two pieces I'm going to insert a old
character where that space was and and
grab a pointer to the beginnings of the
two parts of the string um which I
called command and args and that'll let
me separate down here when I respond to
um duty cycle commands or frequency
commands it lets me put the the the
numeric value that comes after that
command into its own little string um
and then I can continue with my um my my
string comparisons my list of if
statements to see okay was the first
part of this message was it the on
command was it the off command was it
the DC command or the free Command and
if it was one of the last two um then I
can check if there is a numeric um
argument
given
um okay so here in my Arduino code I'll
show you that real quick
all right again I'm checking if a
character is available I'm echoing it
once I receive it as long as it's not
the new line of the carriage return I'm
just adding that to my string now once I
do have I have received that that new
liner carriage return uh I'm going to
check if there is a space and if there
is I'll carve that string up into two
pieces and then here is my long if uh
IFL statement basically if it's on do
something if it's off do something
different if it's the DC command then
we'll uh we'll check we'll do something
slightly different if there was or was
not a numeric value present because at
least in my implementation I decided you
could specify a duty cycle value with a
number and if you left that off then the
system should report back to you what
the current duty cycle
is um and same thing with the frequency
command and then I reset the string and
we start all over again
all right um I want to say uh one thing
about carving this string up so we saw
what we were doing or what I chose to do
is kind of manually carve the string up
manually search for the spaces and
insert those no characters um it's also
possible to use the string uh string
token function in the C library or
string toore R um that basically does
the same thing uh furthermore I chose to
um because my commands were simple B
basically uh have kind of two two values
my command uh string and my argument
string uh another uh possible solution
might be to kind of follow the argc argv
style of command line arguments and um
instead of just kind of carving this
thing up into like a first and second
oops um inserting um or you know
grabbing a pointer to the beginning of
each space separated argument in my
command line string and then reporting
the the count and the the the list of
string pointers to my my
program okay so
um uh so that that for me was like a
watershed moment right because because
I'm seeing folks Implement these like
you know these command line interfaces
here and I thought there was some magic
to it and it just comes down to um once
we have this string in memory carving it
up somehow um using spaces or commas or
semicolons to kind of separate our
arguments and then and then string
matching right string matching in in
potentially a longish if else chain to
find what's what's there and do
something with it um okay so then I I do
have H A number of links though for some
further advancements the first section
here are a number of libraries um that
will allow you to develop command line
interfaces much more sophisticated than
kind of the ones you saw today this this
I think works fine if you've got you
know a dozen or so arguments um that are
all super well defined but as soon as we
start wanting to get into optional
arguments and positional arguments and
and things like that um we'll want to
reach for something a little more
powerful um
so um the M fa one is is is basically
probably the next best step um to the
one or the next in complexity um it it
functions almost the same as what we saw
here it just basically um kind of wraps
up each of our um the commands that
we're executing into their own functions
and you know plug them into an array
which is kind of a nice way to clean up
the code so that I don't have a whole
bunch of um tendrils in my command
processing stuff to all over like Global
variables and into other modules and
things
um the um args and get opt and gen get
op are libraries that um were originally
developed for like a command line
interface but I I I um um it's my it's
my belief that with you could you could
use those very easily and like an
embedded system um as long as like we
saw above you kind of follow this argc
argv style when we were parsing up our
string um additionally there's a number
of architectural improvements we can
make to our system so the first I
thought was pretty cool is um over
wireless wireless communication so what
I've got um here is an interface to my
Arduino Nano iot device and uh the cool
part for me about this was the code that
we saw to to make this command interface
work is almost word for word on this
Arduino right here I basically subbed
out like the serial do available command
for like a Wi-Fi dot available um but
almost unchanged I can I can run the
same code I can turn my LED off I can
turn it back on
again I can set the frequency to
something rather
fast I can change the duty cycle to
something really high hopefully you're
all seeing that because I'm looking at
the back of it right now um which uh so
so now you know this is not just like a
wired connection to my device right as
long as I've got a little Wi-Fi antenna
um anywhere I can I can have this device
set up you know on my on my workbench
and connect to it over Wi-Fi very easily
and start typing commands at it um okay
Additionally you might think about um uh
separating out some of this this code so
that the the uh command processor is um
not so much directly controlling like my
LEDs but sort of sending messages so
that there's a little more um better
encapsulation between my modules um I
could consider double buffering my
system so that I don't I can sort of
receive a string at the same time that
I'm currently processing one um
additionally as these get more and more
complex I might have to start thinking
about the security aspects of you know
in this in this uh command handling code
uh enforcing privilege levels or logins
um or I could even add more robust
framing or error checking in especially
in a noisy environment to make sure that
those commands are received
correctly um I was very careful when I
was typing this stuff out because the
code we saw also does not do anything if
I hit the backspace key because I made
an error it doesn't actually delete
anything right it just sends the
backspace like asky code to my
microcontroller so get line and line
noise here are two examples of um some
ways to implement you know some of those
backspace characters or left right
arrows or things like that um and then
additionally I mentioned there's a
couple of um uh os's basically that you
can put on your microcontroller um so
here's some examples of of those and I
link also to being able to do the onchip
debugging over the UR peripheral on
cortex and so I could kind of like write
my command line interface to actually
like set break points and single step
over code and things like that like from
the UR peripheral which is pretty
cool um okay so uh here's your summary U
like I said it's just I'm really just
doing string comparisons um and and from
there I I can I can do a whole bunch of
of of other stuff leveraging some of the
other libraries that um uh that you saw
the slides are available there I've got
a link to all the Arduino and the stm32
code I was showing you on my GitHub
github.com Nathan Charles Jones simple-
CLI um and gosh thanks so much for being
here and hearing me BL and I hope you
enjoy the rest of the
conference while you're here any any
questions anybody wants to feel like
asking before we
leave yeah absolutely so um let's
see get line was actually like a a piece
of code written for a book
um using stm32 development with free OAS
so this is probably the simpler one um
and basically these uh you can kind of
see here the um the characters that
we're going to we're going to support
they're they're asy codes of some sort
um and in this function where we are
getting a line um instead of just sort
of like previously when I when there was
a charact seral character available it
just got added to my my running buffer
before we did that essentially if we
wanted to do something a little more
sophisticated we would say okay what
what character is it cuz if it is the
control U or backspace or whatever then
we'll we'll do some manual manipulations
on our string to be able to kind of like
re roll the pointer back one or delete a
character set the pointer to the start
of the string and if it's not um then
down here
somewhere no so you can um you would do
it kind of one character at a time and
at least the the the the terminals
you're using like a putty terminal is
smart enough that if it receives that
backspace character it knows to like
roll back one so you as a user will see
like the character get deleted and with
this code on the microcontroller then
also in the meem in the string in memory
the the sort of pointer or the string
will get rolled back one yeah um
readline is the U a much more robust um
Library where' this go
excuse me no I lost all my slides okay
um sorry line noise is much more robust
actually readline I think is another one
that should probably go on here this is
this is a much larger this actually also
I think supports like tab completion
yeah and like history you can like up
Arrow back to like previous commands um
but of course a bit more robust than
just like a 40 line C code or something
like that right exactly
[Music]
yeah yeah other questions
so when when an MCU wakes up sometimes
there are junk characters in the uart
um so on so this is like if I'm on a
console and I wake up the processor I
don't want necessarily to want to see
like garbage characters on my on my
display um I don't know if I got a great
answer for that off the top of my head
um I'd like to think that uh there is a
a a a way before anything gets sent out
for me to make sure that some my my
buffer my fifo whatever is cleared out
um the other the other um tactic might
be to just expand on the the console a
little bit right so I'm I'm just using
putty right a little dumb console but of
course I could have written some python
code that just sort of read characters
over the art and and printed them
somewhere and so it might be that if you
know I can um a lot of the stuff
honestly the other kind of the whole
other tack to doing a command line
interface
is having something like python actually
read my my commands that I'm typing
right ask for input from me and I type
in a string and python does the string
parsing and then what it would send to
the microcontroller is like uh like a
compressed code right code 47 might mean
turn the LED on right and so then uh
that can like put some of the resources
away from the microcontroller onto the
host computer and so maybe the other
solution would be if there's no way
around it I can I can I can have a
python script that would normally just
sort of like patch you know input and
print stuff to the microcontroller but
then otherwise looks for like what would
NE what would be garbage characters
right you would look for you know a a
specific bite to signify the start of a
transmission and if and if it got
garbage stuff from the microcontroller
when it woke up it could just kind of
ignore data until it sees that start
character yeah great
question what
else yeah
ask
charactersles en
oh okay
um yeah so
[Music]
um basically all so um I think I want to
say all of these the CLI libraries um
there's a step where you define your
command list and then um and either
there's like a processing step maybe
where the software generates a C file
and header file from my command descript
table description and I include that
into my my code that so my
microcontroller can respond to it or
sometimes like in the case of the um the
Mena Library I'm I'm really just sort of
like specifying an array you know um
where I I say for this if the first word
matches this sequence of characters run
this function
um so um so really once we get Beyond
kind of just our basic if else chain all
of them have a means of as long as I'm
make sure there is a unique identifier
for each of these commands um the unique
function gets run um and that can happen
either like in an array that I type in
or in like some pre-processing step
where I Define this command table so
much yeah much more extensible than just
like continuously adding an an F LF or
whatever all right I think we got a
break next thanks again everyone for
being here have a great time at the
conference
[Applause]